# Compute shaders

Compute shaders are a way to take advantage of the enormous computational power of graphics processors that implement OpenGL. Just like all shaders in OpenGL, they are written in GLSL and run in large parallel groups that simultaneously work on huge amounts of data. In addition to the facilities available to other shaders such as texturing, storage buffers, and atomic memory operations, compute shaders are able to synchronize with one another and share data among themselves to make general computation easier. They stand apart from the rest of the OpenGL pipeline and are designed to provide as much flexibility to the application developer as possible. In this lesson, we discuss compute shaders, examine their similarities and their differences to other shader types in OpenGL, and explain some of their unique properties and abilities.

## Using Compute Shaders

Modern graphics processors are extremely powerful devices capable of performing a huge amount of numeric calculation. The compute shader stage is effectively its own pipeline, somewhat disconnected from the rest of OpenGL. It has no fixed inputs or outputs, does not interface with any of the fixed-function pipeline stages, is very flexible, and has capabilities that other stages do not possess.

Having said this, a compute shader is just like any other shader from a programming point of view. It is written in GLSL, represented as a shader object, and linked into a program object. When you create a compute shader, you call glCreateShader() and pass the GL_COMPUTE_SHADER parameter as the shader type. You get back a new shader object from this call that you can use to load your shader code with glShaderSource(), compile with glCompileShader(), and attach to a program object with glAttachShader(). Then, you link the program object by calling glLinkProgram(), just as you would with any graphics program.

You can’t mix and match compute shaders with shaders of other types. For example, you can’t attach a compute shader to a program object that also has a vertex or fragment shader attached to it and then link the program object. If you attempt this, the link will fail. Thus, a linked program object can contain only compute shaders or only graphics shaders (vertex, tessellation, geometry, or fragment), but not a combination of the two. We will sometimes refer to a linked program object that contains compute shaders (and so only compute shaders) as a compute program (as opposed to a graphics program, which contains only graphics shaders).

Example code to compile and link our do-nothing compute shader:

```
GLuint      compute_shader;
GLuint      compute_program;

static const GLchar * compute_source[] =
{
    '#version 450 core                                       \n'
    '                                                        \n'
    'layout (local_size_x = 32, local_size_y = 32) in;       \n'
    '                                                        \n'
    'void main(void)                                         \n'
    '{                                                       \n'
    '   // Do nothing                                        \n'
    '}                                                       \n'
};

// Create a shader, attach source, and compile.
compute_shader = glCreateShader(GL_COMPUTE_SHADER);
glShaderSource(compute_shader, 1, compute_source, NULL);
glCompileShader(compute_shader);

// Create a program, attach shader, link.
compute_program = glCreateProgram();
glAttachShader(compute_program, compute_shader);
glLinkProgram(compute_program);

// Delete shader because we're done with it.
glDeleteShader(compute_shader);
```

Once you have run the code, you will have a ready-to-run compute program in compute_program. A compute program can use uniforms, uniform blocks, shader storage blocks, and so on, just as any other program does. You also make it current by calling glUseProgram(). Once it is the current program object, functions such as glUniform*() affect its state as normal.